# What is European Studies 

## A quick introduction
European Studies is an **interdisciplinary** field of study, combining political science, sociology, history, economics, law, and cultural studies. Compared to similar study programmes like International Relations, European Studies **focuses on Europe** and the European Union, as its name suggests. It examines Europe from multiple angles, spanning from European ideas and visions to the present political and social reality. It discusses important questions like European integration, identity, governance, and Europe’s global role that contribute to our understanding of how Europe shapes, and is shaped by dynamics within and beyond its borders.

## Origins
European Studies emerged in the **mid-20th century** alongside the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) which was the first cornerstone in European cooperation after WWII. The ECSC project would also evolve over the next decades to become the European Union we know today. Initially the academic field focused on the understanding of **European integration and EU institutions** but over time it expanded its scope, including important topics like Europeanization, nationalism, regionalism, and external relations. 

## Core Research Themes
The research in the field of European Studies is as vast as the many disciplines that shape it. This section will only list a couple of them to grant an overview: 
+ **European Identity**: How is it constructed and contested? Who belongs to Europe and who doesn't? What does it mean to be European?
+ **EU Governance**: What role does the EU play in governing its member states? How does the EU affect regional policy-making? Is the EU an effective and legitimate policy-making instituion?
+ **EU's Global Role**: How does Europe interact with it's neighbours? What role does the EU have as a global actor? What shapes the EU's external relations with other parts of the globe? 
+ **Challenges**: Exploration of multiple challenges and crises on topics like Migration, Climate Change, Economic Challenges, Democratic Backsliding

## Key Takeaways 
European Studies is a vast and diverse field of study exploring Europe in its various dimensions. It started out with focusing on European Integration and the EU institutions, but it also keeps evolving together with Europe itself. Today, issues of migration, climate change and economic backsliding are on top of the agenda, that are being explored by great minds from various backgrounds and academic fields. 

# Digital Transformation in European Studies
## Introduction
As European Studies combines many interdisciplinary fields, it is also shaped by a diverse landscape of methods. These methods have also evolved over time and as technology is getting more advanced, it has also found its way into academic research, and European Studies is no exception. While traditional methods in European Studies are archival research, qualitative interviews, discourse analysis, digital methods and technologies have become indispensable. This includes the the collection of data and literature, analysis and communication of research. 

## Digital Technologies in Academia 
Nowdays, digital methods are essential for every researcher, and a variety of them are being used on the regular. Digitalization has completely changed the way research and literature is being accessed and published. University Libraries and Publishers have switched their focus from physical to digital media, many archives are available online and access to statistics, information and other data for research also mainly happens online. For example, scholars of European Studies often interact with databases like Eurostat (statistics), EUR-lex (legislation), and other information and data that can be found on the digital representations of the many EU institutions. 
The way researchers interact and communicate has also changed drastically. Networking and exchange has become a lot easier and academic platforms like Google Scholar or ResearchGate have had a profound impact on tracking and sharing outputs. These developments come with a lot of opportunities. Research is more accessable than ever, cooperation and communication between researchers and academics has become way easier and data is more available than ever before. 

## Digital Technologies in the Humanities and European Studies
Just like everyone else, European Studies has also been heavily affected by digital developments. Digital archives and data portals are vital for every researcher. 
Furthermore, as European Studies combines such a wide array of academic fields, depending on your focus as a researcher, a variety of programs and technologies are frequently used. One of the most important technologies that is frequently used by researchers is text mining. As research in European Studies often includes speeches, publications, legislations, and various other types of written documents, the possibility to collect and analyze large corpuses of written texts has had a big impact. 

A good example is Rocca et al. (2024) using text-modelling to observe how the European Commission changed its communication on social media over the years. 
Another aspect that has become more relevant in the last years is the usage of basic coding and programming skills as they allow researchers to tackle more complex data and issues. Especially when it comes to the collection of digital data, web scrapers are a very useful tool for researchers to equip themselves with. Gorostiza-Cerviño, et al. (2023) used web scraping to gather a corpus of 12,430 political groups, institutions or stakeholder, something that could hardly be done without it. 

Another interesting application for digital techonologies is whenever studies try to model or predict future scenarios. This can be done using simple statistical or graphical tools in excel, but can also be done in a more sophisticated manner, like Sernani, et al. (2025) did, when they used machine learning to predict election outcomes based on social media popularity. Another great example is a study by Adema & Alipour (2025), which illustrates how digital technologies can be used to make empirical arguments on complex situations. In their case they use regression models together with logarithmic transformation of relevant variables to test for systematic correlations in a dataset. 
While some methods are more complex than others, the usage of digital tools like machine learning to predict outcomes, evaluate public policy or simply make empirical observations in the political sciences is playing an increasingly important role. 

Also at Aarhus University, digital methods are being taught to students. For example, in a qualitative methods course, students are being introduced to text mining with softwares like NVivio, Orange and QualCoder. These are computational linguistics tools, that allow the study of large corpuses of data like political speeches, news and other media. This is just an example of one area, which traditionally would be fully analogue, where qualitative research merges with digital technologies, to create the possibility to increase the scale to otherwise unimaginable levels of input and output. Thomson, et al. (2017) also argue that the possibility to access and use huge datasets or "big data" is one of the central aspects that digital technologies have brought to researchers and academics.  This does not mean that research becomes more "neutral" or "objective", but it opens up new possibilities, that would almost be impossible without the use of digital tools. 

# Emmerging Technologies 
## The Elephant in the Room: AI
While multiple technologies are on the rise in the Humanities, none is as important and impactful as Artificial Intelligence (AI). Large Language Models (LLM) like ChatGPT have a big impact on both educational and analytical aspects. It changes the way people access information, how people extract knowledge from texts and how students write their papers (Papadakis, 2024). At the same time it also allows new ways of coducting research. It can be used to assist in the analysis and collection of data, or to generate ideas and whole texts. As influential as LLM's like ChatGPT are, they have also sparked a debate among academics regarding its use. Because despite its great potential and its possibilities, the use of generative AI also bears many risks. The concerns over its use span from ethical issues like bias and fair use, to practical issues like "hallucinations" and wrong information, to educational ones, like cognitive offloading (Haber, et al., 2025). AI also remains an interesting topic as it is still a very new technology and laws and rules around its use are still very scarce. It is very likely however that this will remain one of the most important developments in European Studies and Academia as a whole over the next couple of years. 

## Opportunities and Vital Technologies
As mentioned before, European Studies is as diverse as the multiple academic disciplines it combines. No single digital technology is "necessary" and the ones that are useful will vary a lot on your focus points. If you are researching on the economic dimensions it is beneficial to be familiar with statistical and graphical tools and if you are analyzing political discourse, text mining will be more important.  
The one thing, that is true for all of them though, is that AI presents new opportunities to all researchers, especially those who have very little technical knowledge, as they now have a tool to learn and use a whole array of different tools and method. Never learned how to use programming languages like python? No problem, AI will guide you through it. Want to learn how to scrape and reformat large corpuses of data to use in your research? One promt and AI will equip you with all the knowledge you need to do that. I think the biggest thing for academics to take away is, that all the digital technologies that were too complex or too impractical before, are now just a few promts away from being usable, which enables a whole new world of potential methods. Knowing how to use these will be an essential part going forward. 


# References
+ Aarhus University. (2025). Master’s degree programme in European Studies. Retrieved November 11, 2025, from https://masters.au.dk/europeanstudies
+ Aarhus University. (2021). *Academic regulations for Master's Degree Programme in European Studies (2021)*. Board of Studies, Department of Culture and Society. https://eddiprod.au.dk/EDDI/webservices/DokOrdningService.cfc?method=visGodkendtOrdning&dokOrdningId=16715&sprog=en
+ Adema, J., & Alipour, J. (2025). *Steigert Migration die Kriminalität? Ein datenbasierter Blick.* In (Vol. 6). ifo Schnelldienst digital. https://www.ifo.de/DocDL/sd-2025-digital-03-adema-alipour-migration-kriminalitaet.pdf
+ Borgman, C. L. *Big Data, Little Data, No Data: Scholarship in the Networked World.* 1st ed., MIT Press, 2015, https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9963.001.0001.
+ Gorostiza-Cerviño, A., Serna-Ortega, Á., Moreno-Cabanillas, A., & Castillo-Esparcia, A. (2023). Navigating the Digital Sphere: Exploring Websites, Social Media, and Representation Costs—A European Union Case Study. Social Sciences (Basel), 12(11), 616. https://doi.org/10.3390/socsci12110616
+ Haber, E., Jemielniak, D., Kurasiński, A., & Przegalińska, A. (2025). Using AI in Academic Writing and Research: A Complete Guide to Effective and Ethical Academic AI (1st ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-91705-9
+ Papadakis, S. (2024). *IoT, AI, and ICT for Educational Applications : Technologies to Enable Education for All* (1st ed. 2024.). Springer Nature Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-50139-5
+ Rocca, R., Lawall, K., Tsakiris, M. et al. (2024). *Communicating Europe: a computational analysis of the evolution of the European Commission’s communication on Twitter.* J Comput Soc Sc 7, 1223–1274. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42001-024-00271-w
+ Sernani, P., Cossiri, A., Di Cosimo, G., & Frontoni, E. (2025). *Analyzing Digital Political Campaigning Through Machine Learning: An Exploratory Study for the Italian Campaign for European Union Parliament Election in 2024.* Computers (Basel), 14(4), 126. https://doi.org/10.3390/computers14040126
+ Thomson, P., et al., editors. (2017) *The Digital Academic : Critical Perspectives on Digital Technologies in Higher Education.* Routledge.
