# Digital Transformation in European Studies
## Introduction
As European Studies combines many interdisciplinary fields, it is also shaped by a diverse landscape of methods. These methods have also evolved over time and as technology is getting more advanced, it has also found its way into academic research, and European Studies is no exception. While traditional methods in European Studies are archival research, qualitative interviews, discourse analysis, digital methods and technologies have become indispensable. This includes the the collection of data and literature, analysis and communication of research. 

## Digital Technologies in Academia 
Nowdays, digital methods are essential for every researcher, and a variety of them are being used on the regular. Digitalization has completely changed the way research and literature is being accessed and published. University Libraries and Publishers have switched their focus from physical to digital media, many archives are available online and access to statistics, information and other data for research also mainly happens online. For example, scholars of European Studies often interact with databases like Eurostat (statistics), EUR-lex (legislation), and other information and data that can be found on the digital representations of the many EU institutions. 
The way researchers interact and communicate has also changed drastically. Networking and exchange has become a lot easier and academic platforms like Google Scholar or ResearchGate have had a profound impact on tracking and sharing outputs. These developments come with a lot of opportunities. Research is more accessable than ever, cooperation and communication between researchers and academics has become way easier and data is more available than ever before. 

## Digital Technologies in the Humanities and European Studies
Just like everyone else, European Studies has also been heavily affected by digital developments. Digital archives and data portals are vital for every researcher. 
Furthermore, as European Studies combines such a wide array of academic fields, depending on your focus as a researcher, a variety of programs and technologies are frequently used. One of the most important technologies that is frequently used by researchers is text mining. As research in European Studies often includes speeches, publications, legislations, and various other types of written documents, the possibility to collect and analyze large corpuses of written texts has had a big impact. 

A good example is Rocca et al. (2024) using text-modelling to observe how the European Commission changed its communication on social media over the years. 
Another aspect that has become more relevant in the last years is the usage of basic coding and programming skills as they allow researchers to tackle more complex data and issues. Especially when it comes to the collection of digital data, web scrapers are a very useful tool for researchers to equip themselves with. Gorostiza-Cerviño, et al. (2023) used web scraping to gather a corpus of 12,430 political groups, institutions or stakeholder, something that could hardly be done without it. 

Another interesting application for digital techonologies is whenever studies try to model or predict future scenarios. This can be done using simple statistical or graphical tools in excel, but can also be done in a more sophisticated manner, like Sernani, et al. (2025) did, when they used machine learning to predict election outcomes based on social media popularity. Another great example is a study by Adema & Alipour (2025), which illustrates how digital technologies can be used to make empirical arguments on complex situations. In their case they use regression models together with logarithmic transformation of relevant variables to test for systematic correlations in a dataset. 
While some methods are more complex than others, the usage of digital tools like machine learning to predict outcomes, evaluate public policy or simply make empirical observations in the political sciences is playing an increasingly important role. 

Also at Aarhus University, digital methods are being taught to students. For example, in a qualitative methods course, students are being introduced to text mining with softwares like NVivio, Orange and QualCoder. These are computational linguistics tools, that allow the study of large corpuses of data like political speeches, news and other media. This is just an example of one area, which traditionally would be fully analogue, where qualitative research merges with digital technologies, to create the possibility to increase the scale to otherwise unimaginable levels of input and output. Thomson, et al. (2017) also argue that the possibility to access and use huge datasets or "big data" is one of the central aspects that digital technologies have brought to researchers and academics.  This does not mean that research becomes more "neutral" or "objective", but it opens up new possibilities, that would almost be impossible without the use of digital tools. 