# Emmerging Technologies 
## The Elephant in the Room: AI
While multiple technologies are on the rise in the Humanities, none is as important and impactful as Artificial Intelligence (AI). Large Language Models (LLM) like ChatGPT have a big impact on both educational and analytical aspects. It changes the way people access information, how people extract knowledge from texts and how students write their papers (Papadakis, 2024). At the same time it also allows new ways of coducting research. It can be used to assist in the analysis and collection of data, or to generate ideas and whole texts. As influential as LLM's like ChatGPT are, they have also sparked a debate among academics regarding its use. Because despite its great potential and its possibilities, the use of generative AI also bears many risks. The concerns over its use span from ethical issues like bias and fair use, to practical issues like "hallucinations" and wrong information, to educational ones, like cognitive offloading (Haber, et al., 2025). AI also remains an interesting topic as it is still a very new technology and laws and rules around its use are still very scarce. It is very likely however that this will remain one of the most important developments in European Studies and Academia as a whole over the next couple of years. 

## Opportunities and Vital Technologies
As mentioned before, European Studies is as diverse as the multiple academic disciplines it combines. No single digital technology is "necessary" and the ones that are useful will vary a lot on your focus points. If you are researching on the economic dimensions it is beneficial to be familiar with statistical and graphical tools and if you are analyzing political discourse, text mining will be more important.  
The one thing, that is true for all of them though, is that AI presents new opportunities to all researchers, especially those who have very little technical knowledge, as they now have a tool to learn and use a whole array of different tools and method. Never learned how to use programming languages like python? No problem, AI will guide you through it. Want to learn how to scrape and reformat large corpuses of data to use in your research? One promt and AI will equip you with all the knowledge you need to do that. I think the biggest thing for academics to take away is, that all the digital technologies that were too complex or too impractical before, are now just a few promts away from being usable, which enables a whole new world of potential methods. Knowing how to use these will be an essential part going forward.